---
layout: post
title: Growing into management
---

There are two different mindsets when it comes to the role of engineering manager
in software-focused companies (can’t speak for others).

The “old school”:

> Your manager is your boss. 
> Every senior engineer should aspire to “grow into” a manager role at some point, 
> which comes with a hierarchy bump and a salary increase.

The “new school”:

> Your manager is your peer.
> Going from engineering to management is a career track
> change, equal to going from management to engineering. It does not come with a salary increase.
> If anything, it should come with a slight decrease, because you're going from being an expert at something,
> to being new at something.

I sit firmly in the second camp. I do respect that some companies arrange their business
around the first one, but I also think that it's not an efficient way to organize business.

And here's why: **they are different jobs**. It's not much different than promoting the 
lead guitarist into becoming the band manager.

In the modern new school approach, engineers can grow in two main ways:
- Becoming the architect and overseer
- Becoming the subject-matter expert

Naturally, different companies might put a different emphasis on those two approaches. 
Some might focus on the former, requiring their staff / principal / etc engineers to extend
the scope of their work as they go up, and expand their reach 
to the organisation level above their current one. This often comes hand-in-hand with writing
less actual code and spending more times on things like RFCs and code reviews, coordinating
activities, unblocking teams etc.
Other companies will focus on the latter, expecting deep expertise from the promoted engineers.
For example, this is often the case in mobile app development, where a staff engineer doesn't really
have to collaborate across many different projects or bridge different teams; they are simply the
person in a small app-building few-people project that has the most technical expertise, and can
therefore lead the technical decision-making.

Both of those approaches grow an engineer into greater depth/breadth and build on top
of what they already do (and are good at doing). Such growth is what promotions really should be about.
And then there's a whole separate unrelated thing -
the option to jump onto a _completely different_ track and become a manager. 
This is not a promotion, but a career shift. 

Here's a common two-tracks setup: 
```
interns and juniors ---> senior engineer ---> staff engineer     ---> etc
N/A                 ---> eng manager     ---> senior eng manager ---> etc
```
Each column represents one level in the career progress hierarchy.

Also, here's a guideline that I heard somewhere and found very insightful:

> Engineers lead craft and influence people.  
> Managers lead people and influence craft.

Speaking from personal experience of having worked in companies on both sides of the divide,
I strongly believe that such parallel way of defining engineer and manager roles leads to more 
productivity, efficiency, and overall
satisfaction. Here are three reasons why:
- **The workflow is improved.** A manager can put an engineer in the driver's seat any time the 
decision-making process requires technical knowledge, which will move things much faster. 
In the old school way, it's always the manager's job to dictate the way forward.
- **Everyone is good at what they do.** Poor engineers might make great managers and vice versa. Everyone
should be choosing a role that suits them, rather than having to start with one and "grow" into the other.
- **Everyone is happy.** No project will benefit from a disgruntled manager who is nostalgic 
about their engineering work, but felt like going to management was the expected progression. 
In the "new school" system, it's easy to switch back to engineering 
without any friction or sense of demotion (I've witnessed that with several friends and colleagues).

Again, not everything works for everyone. Some companies might be better off doing things the old way.
I just wanted to point out that it's not the only way, and in my opinion, it's also not the best way.
