---
layout: post
title: Goff's Panpsychism
---

Philip Goff deals with the philosophy of mind and consciousness, and is a proponent of *panpsychism*.

Panpsychism is a view that consciousness is a fundamental and ubiquitous feature of the physical world. That it goes "all the way down", to the very basic building blocks of reality.

It does not say that everything is conscious in the anthropomorphic sense. Chairs and tables don't feel happiness
or anger or existential dread. It defines consciousness not as "awareness of one's existence", but merely as 
"experience of being", whatever that means for the particular entity. 
As we go down from humans to animals to plants to molecules and atoms and particles,
the consciousness becomes more and more basic, and the experience becomes less sophisticated. But there are still
some experiences that those below have, and those above don't - e.g. bats know what it's like to use
echolocation, but us humans never will.

It claims that consciousness is part of the physical world, but a separate part. Matter describes
what stuff *does*, while consciousness describes what stuff *is*. Some other views state that:
- Consciousness can be completely explained in the terms of physical science (e.g. electrochemical signals
  in the brain), we just haven't yet figured out how. This view is known
  as *materialism*.
- Consciousness is non-physical, outside of physical workings of the body and the brain. This view is known
  as *dualism*.

Panpsychism is the best of both worlds - consciousness is indeed part of the material world, in fact a very
fundamental one, present in all matter. But our current mathematical formulations and models do not account
for that fact, therefore we cannot hope to explain consciousness using the current quantitative approach used
in science and math.

In other words, panpsychism does not advocate for some voodoo magic that opposes science.
On the contrary, it accepts (as it should) everything that science has discovered so far. But it claims that we left out
one very important and fundamental part of reality, and we need to go back to the drawing board. 
Galileo Galilei is credited 
with making science completely mathematical, which required separating qualitative subjective experience and
putting it aside.
Science can describe a color in terms of its hue/saturation/etc, or its wavelength, but it cannot capture
what it feels like to experience a red sunset. Panspsychism wants to bring consciousness back into the story
and include it in the mathematical model of the world. And it invites science to
collaborate with philosophy in order to figure that out.
