---
layout: post
title: Why is Berlin like that?
---

Living in Berlin (Germany) for some time now, I've often wondered - how did it become like this?

Everyone who's ever been to Berlin knows what I'm talking about. I mean properly been to Berlin,
not those two day visits when you walk around the Brandenburg Gate and Checkpoint Charlie and visit
a few museums. And I know how this sounds, but I'm not even talking about clubs and drugs,
although that is a big thing around here (I'm more of a bars & booze guy myself).

What I mean is, anyone who stopped being a tourist for a second and just spent some time
wandering around surely can notice
a different energy than what most cities offer. London has Shoreditch, 
Marseille has Notre-Dame-du-Mont, Stockholm has Södermalm. It's all nice
and playful, with piles of hipsters enjoying craft beers and vegan burgers 
alongside two or three colorful streets. But I find them to be quite
commercial. They don't have the rawness, the DIY vibe,
the face-tattooed girl playing bongo drums on the street. And if you think I'm just trying
to make Berlin sound great, I'm not. It's just how it is, with pros and cons. 
You might run into a diverse crowd of young people with colorful hairs sharing a joint,
but you also might run into a naked homeless guy, 
drugged out of his mind, rubbing his dick on a traffic sign while yelling "Ashes to ashes".

Granted, you're more likely to find this in Kreuzberg or Neukölln or Friedrichshain than
some other "calmer" neighbourhoods. But even in my favorite Prenzlauer Berg, seeing
a person dressed as a fox cycling past and blasting techno is just a normal Tuesday afternoon.

What made Berlin this way? I collected some facts from various sources.

**The early days**

The story starts over a hundred years ago. After the abdication of Wilhem II at the end of World War I, 
Germany was converted into an unstable democratic state known as the Weimar Republic. People suddenly
felt more free, with less authority and restriction hanging over their heads.
As The Third Reich started developing, it focused on the "intelligence over intellect",
as Joseph Goebbels used to put it. He had a particular problem with the so-called "Asphalt literature"
and "Asphalt culture", mostly referring to the urban "big city" progressive mindset, particularly
found in Berlin.
He wanted to distance the people away from intellectual
thinking and towards traditional nationalist values, famously [burning a ton of books](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nazi_book_burnings)
  in Berlin in 1933. And Berlin, guilty as charged, 
high on life and art and opioids, remained a particular thorn in their eyes.

**The cold war**

After World War II, West Berlin was controlled by the USA, UK and France, with the Soviets
taking the East Berlin. One interesting detail during this era that also might have contributed in some capacity, was
the [total removal of curfew in West Berlin in 1949](https://wamu.org/story/22/09/23/how-a-whiskey-fueled-meeting-in-1949-led-to-berlins-famed-techno-scene/),
an effort by The West to show their progressive mindset. 
That's when the famous Berlin "go in on Friday, get out on Monday"
started.

And in 1961, as we all know, Soviets built a wall to physically prevent the "brain drain"
from East to West. 
Berlin was economically struggling. It was becoming poor. But as much of bad news
as it was for the upper middle class, it was great news for artists and bohemians and hippies, who were
now even more drawn to Berlin. Liberal mindset, access to drugs, and cheap rent. The dream.

This particularly affected Kreuzberg and Neuköln, nowadays considered the most "Berliny" district. 
Thing is, West Berlin was technically
not part of The Federal Republic of Germany
(Bundesrepublik Deutschland, aka "West Germany"). De facto yes, de jure not. This meant that lots of people
from West Berlin who wanted to evade being possibly drafted, found sanctuary in West Berlin. 
On top of that, lots of people from East Berlin who wanted to escape the Soviets found sanctuary in West Berlin as well.
The open-minded liberals. The LGBT+ community. The artists. The party people. The anti-war hippies.
None of whom were thriving financially - and so-called Kreuzköln was the cheapest part of West Berlin.
Last but not least, being the cheapest district, it also attracted tons of immigrants and foreign workers,
mostly of Turkish origin. According to various sources (easy to Google), Kreuzberg contains about 180 different
nationalities nowadays.

**The fall of the Berlin wall**

And now for the final part - when the Berlin Wall finally came down in 1989, there was a massive population shift
from East Berlin to West Berlin. It left districts like Friedrichshain, Mitte and Prenzlauer Berg completely
deserted. Guess what? More hippies / artists / party folks came in swarms, paying crazy cheap rents or living
for free, squatting in deserted buildings, doing their art by day, and hosting underground techno parties by night.
And day.

That's how it happened. And while those few districts most strongly represent the old spirit of Berlin, 
its vibe flows and gets mixed throughout the whole city, giving Berlin that particular vibe.